**Addis guidance on options for returning stolen assets for sustainable
development**

During the International Expert Meeting on asset return and sustainable
development ("Addis IV"), participants discussed the advantages, risks
and conditions for success of different asset return models for
sustainable development, as well as the lessons learned and the good
practices exchanged on these models. The following text summarizes the
outcomes of these discussions.

I.  **General considerations**

A thorough assessment of the specific context of the asset return is
required to enable requesting and requested States parties to the United
Nations Convention against Corruption to choose the most suitable option
for asset return and for ensuring the highest impact on sustainable
development.

The asset return options discussed below may be combined in specific
cases and are not necessarily mutually exclusive.

A further compilation of common elements to be kept in mind for all
asset return options listed below can be found at the very end of the
present document.

II. **Options for returning stolen assets for sustainable development**

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  **Option 1: Direct return to the government budget of the requesting
    State**

**Description:** Assets are returned directly to the government budget
of the requesting State, without any restrictions on how such returned
assets will be spent. **This approach has been used in numerous cases including elements of the 1MDB returns from Singapore to Malaysia, as well as several returns between European Union countries.**

While such a direct return does not necessarily require an agreement
between the requesting and the requested States, agreements may still be
entered into, depending on requirements and preferences of the
individual States parties involved in the return.

**Advantages**:

a.  Higher efficiency, lower administrative costs

    i.  The requesting State party can use returned funds immediately

    ii. Returned assets are subject to the existing expenditure checks
        by the requesting State party. No dedicated oversight body needs
        to be created, which lowers administrative costs.

    iii. Pecuniary harm to the requesting State party is prevented, as
         returned assets are reintegrated into the State budget

b.  National ownership by requesting State party

    i.  The requesting State party can assign returned funds to priority
        projects and retains flexibility in directing the funds to
        support priority needs, including to cover any budgetary gaps

    ii. The legislative branch in the requesting State party (instead of
        the executive) retains control over how returned assets are
        being used

    iii. Returned assets are subject to existing checks and balances in
         the requesting State party

    iv. Alignment with national priorities and budgetary processes

c.  Creation of trust and speed of return

    i.  Direct returns can be easier to implement and explain at the
        national level in the requesting State party

    ii. Using direct returns can be a sign of trust between governments
        and re-emphasize the sovereignty of the requesting State party
        over decisions related to the use of returned assets **as seen in several European Union internal returns where established mutual trust frameworks exist between countries**

    iii. Any victim compensation mechanisms that exist in the requesting
         State party can be used when assets are returned directly

    iv. Return negotiations and processes using this option tend to
        progress faster, thus leading to faster disbursement and returns **as demonstrated in a 2008 return to Nigeria from Cyprus where Cypriot courts recognized a final judgment of confiscation Nigeria had secured in the United Kingdom, ordering the repatriation of USD 1.3 million to a Nigerian bank account**

**Risks**:

a.  Limited oversight, transparency and accountability

    i.  Direct returns can be easier to implement and explain at the
        national level in the requesting State party

    ii. Monitoring the use of returned assets can be challenging in the
        absence of dedicated monitoring mechanisms; returned assets may
        be diluted in the national budget **as observed in early returns to Peru where the funds were integrated into the general budget with limited tracking mechanisms**

    iii. A lack of dedicated monitoring mechanisms and engagement of
         civil society organizations can lead to limited oversight of
         how funds are being allocated and spent

    iv. Creation of additional transparency and accountability
        mechanisms may be difficult as the return is happening within
        existing budgetary framework

    v.  Tracing and documenting how returned assets were used can be
        difficult in the absence of an agreement stipulating their
        specific use

    vi. Confidentiality can impede the population of the requesting
        State from knowing about asset returns happening and the use of
        returned assets

    vii. Allocation of funding can be changed at the discretion of the
         Government of the requesting State, which may impact on
         allocation for sustainable development purposes

    viii. If there are no victim compensation mechanisms in place, it
          can be hard to introduce them in the context of direct returns

b.  Risk for re-corruption

    i.  In situations of weak governance/fragility, or should offenders
        still be in power, there may be a risk for re-corruption

    ii. Re-corruption of returned assets constitutes a reputational risk
        for both the requesting and the requested State

**Requirements for success**:

i.  Close relationships between the Governments of the requesting and
    the requested State

ii. Pre-existing infrastructure to accommodate asset returns exists in
    the requesting State, including specific legislation on use of
    confiscated/returned assets, financial accountability **as evidenced in the 2013 return from the United Kingdom to Macao SAR of property worth GBP 9.4 million, which relied on established confiscation and asset management systems**

iii. Strong budgetary oversight in requesting State that enables tracing
     how returned assets are being used **as seen in returns between EU countries where robust public financial management systems are typically in place**

iv. Clear assignment of responsibilities for the management of returned
    assets (e.g., a specific agency is responsible and accountable for
    the management and use of such assets)

v.  Smaller amounts tend to be a better fit for direct returns **such as the 2002 return of FJ$ 88,974 from Fiji to Australia and the 2012 return of 135 million Czech Crowns from Austria to Czechia based on the recognition of a final verdict**

vi. Offenders are not in power any more or unable to embezzle returned
    funds again

vii. Functioning anti-corruption authorities are established and funded

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
2.  **Option 2a: Using case-specific agreements for asset return (art. 57, para 5
    UNCAC)**

**Description**: Funds are returned under a bespoke agreement between
the requesting and requested State(s), as per article 57, paragraph 5 of
the United Nations Convention against Corruption. **This approach has been successfully implemented in numerous high-profile returns including the BAE Systems settlement with Tanzania, and returns to Nigeria, Peru, Kazakhstan, and Angola under individually negotiated agreements.**

**Advantages**:

a.  Enhanced international cooperation

    i.  Reaching an agreement enhances international cooperation and
        builds trust between requesting and requested State **as demonstrated in the 2010 U.K. pre-trial settlement with British Aerospace which included an agreement to pay GBP 30 million to Tanzania for education projects**

    ii. Agreements can constitute an incentive and a commitment for
        Governments to deliver **as seen in the Abacha I return from Switzerland to Nigeria, where the returned funds were dedicated to health, education, and infrastructure projects under Nigeria's National Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy**

    iii. Allows for prioritization of needs at the national level

b.  Binding, bespoke agreement

    i.  Offers flexibility in stipulating terms for use, monitoring and
        reporting, including third-party monitoring through civil
        society organizations, if desired **as structured in both Abacha returns to Nigeria, which included monitoring by the World Bank and civil society organizations**

    ii. Clearer definition of how returned funds are to be used **as demonstrated in the two returns from Switzerland to Angola (USD 21 million in 2002 and USD 43 million in 2012) where the funds were specifically designated for mine clearance and agricultural development**

    iii. Sanctions can be agreed upon in case of breach of the agreement **as included in the Abacha II agreement where Nigeria agreed to repay any funds lost to corruption into the account holding the returned assets**

    iv. Offender and offender's family/close associates can be precluded
        from benefitting from returned assets

    v.  Lower risk of re-corruption **as evidenced by the creation of the BOTA Foundation in Kazakhstan which was specifically designed to prevent re-corruption by establishing an entity independent from the government**

    vi. Customizable to address specific needs of the case

    vii. Can offer victim compensation **as demonstrated in cases under the U.S. Mandatory Victim Restitution Act, which allowed Thailand to receive USD 250,000 and Haiti USD 75,000 as compensation in bribery cases**

    viii. Can stipulate involvement of civil society organizations

c.  Accountability and transparency

    i.  Publication of the agreement promotes transparency and
        accountability and facilitates monitoring **as seen in the December 2017 Abacha II agreement between Nigeria and Switzerland, which was made fully public unlike previous return agreements**

    ii. Accountability and transparency/monitoring mechanism can be
        tailor-made to the needs of the agreement and the use of the
        returned assets **as demonstrated in the Abacha II return where Nigeria agreed to account separately for the use of funds through dedicated line items in project work plans and budgets**

    iii. Increases a sense of belonging/ownership in the population

**Risks**:

a.  Lengthy negotiation process

    i.  Lengthy negotiations of an agreement can delay a return of the
        assets and have a negative effect on trust between requesting
        and requested States **as experienced in the protracted negotiations for the Abacha II return, which involved court battles in Liechtenstein and Geneva before an agreement could be reached**

    ii. Negotiations can be politically difficult

    iii. Increased investment of time and effort by requesting and
         requested States when negotiating a separate agreement for each
         return

    iv. Negotiations are often carried out without participation of
        other stakeholders, such as civil society organizations, leading
        to a lack of participation

    v.  Potential for politicization in the absence of a broader return
        framework

b.  Lack of flexibility

    i.  Difficult to amend the use of funds if the situations changes or
        if implementation is planned for a longer period of time

    ii. Difficult to amend agreement to include additional aspects, such
        as whistleblower protection, reporting mechanisms,
        accountability measures, after an agreement has been concluded

    iii. Potential for disputes of the terms of the agreement or its
         implementation

    iv. Implementing parties in the requesting State may not support the
        agreement or the priorities identified, leading to a potential
        for non-compliance with the agreement

c.  Lack of consistency

    i.  If each return is handled individually, there is a potential for
        inconsistency throughout asset returns **as seen in the different approaches taken in the two Abacha returns and the two Kazakhstan returns, with varying monitoring and implementation structures**

    ii. Lack of coordination among requested States can cause
        difficulties for the requesting State

d.  Administrative costs

    i.  Administrative costs can be high **as noted in the BOTA Foundation case from Kazakhstan where approximately 10 percent of funds were spent on program administration**

    ii. Use of returned funds may not be optimal if a project is not
        completed

    iii. Establishment of individual monitoring mechanisms for each
         return agreement may incur significant costs

**Requirements for success**:

a.  Legal requirements

    i.  Compliance with international obligations

    ii. Possibility to enter into return agreements

b.  Trust between requesting and requested State party  

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
i.  Clearly defined roles for the requesting and the requested State **as established in the agreements for both Abacha returns, which clearly defined the roles of Nigeria, Switzerland, and the World Bank**

ii. Pre-existing infrastructure to accommodate asset returns exists in
    the requesting State, including specific legislation on use of
    confiscated/returned assets, financial accountability

iii. Pre-identification of project to benefit from returned assets **as done in the BAE Systems settlement with Tanzania, where education projects were identified in advance and a website was created to track the distribution of textbooks to schools**

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
c.  Communication

    i.  Clear agreement on requirements of the return

    ii. Regular exchange between requesting and requested State

    iii. Publication of agreements to allow for efficient monitoring **as implemented in the Abacha II agreement where both countries pledged to conduct the entire return process in "a transparent and accountable manner that satisfies the scrutiny of civil society organizations and the international community"**

    iv. Establishment of a public involvement/feedback mechanism,
        including concerning which purpose the funds should be assigned
        to **as demonstrated in the Tanzania return where a website allowed citizens to monitor book distribution and report any allegations of fraud or corruption**

d.  Accountability and transparency

    i.  Agreement covers at least specific minimum areas, such as the
        amount, the use of funds, and the applicable monitoring
        mechanism

    ii. Clear agreement on accountability and transparency measures to
        be established

    iii. Clear agreement on monitoring and evaluation requirements **as included in the Abacha II agreement where the World Bank was responsible for monitoring the use of funds following the same policies and procedures as it would for its own projects**

    iv. Project-specific accounting to allow for monitoring and
        traceability

    v.  Involvement of relevant stakeholders to ensure transparency

**Specific considerations for settlements:**

a)  Accountability and transparency required

b)  Disbursements can be faster than using other options, but tracing
    the use of assets can be difficult if there is no clear stipulation
    in the settlement agreement

c)  Settlement funds may not automatically be returned

d)  Settlements can constitute a good opportunity to ensure victim
    compensation and progress in achieving Sustainable Development Goals **as demonstrated in the British Aerospace settlement with Tanzania, which resulted in GBP 30 million being dedicated to education projects**

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
e.  **Option 2b: Return using an Existing Framework Agreement**

**Description**: Use of established framework agreements for asset
return, such as agreements facilitated by multilateral arrangements. **This approach has been effectively employed in cases such as the Framework for the Return of Assets from Corruption in Kenya (FRACCK), Nigeria-UK Memorandum of Understanding, and the Jersey-Nigeria-Switzerland-UK agreement that facilitated the return of nearly USD 4 million to Kenya in December 2018.**

**Advantages**:

a.  Transparency and accountability

    i.  Transparency and accountability measures can be directly built
        into the framework agreement and clearly spelt out **as structured in the FRACCK arrangement which established principles for transparency and accountability in the return of assets to Kenya**

    ii. Monitoring and evaluation mechanisms can be included, allowing
        for greater oversight and control of expenditures **as included in the Nigeria-UK MoU which established clear monitoring procedures for returned assets**

    iii. Clear communication processes can be included to ensure the
         population of the requesting State party is informed of
         developments

b.  Faster individual returns

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
i.  With the framework for returns already in place, individual returns
    can be carried out quicker, without the need for case-specific
    negotiations of the overarching framework or the principles for each
    subsequent case **as demonstrated in the December 2018 return from Jersey to Kenya where the established framework agreement expedited the return process**

    a.  Possibility for scaling up

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
i.  Multi-jurisdictional shared principles showcase political will and
    buy-in **as seen in the FRACCK framework which involved multiple countries (UK, Switzerland, Jersey, and Kenya) cooperating under shared principles**

ii. Other States parties can join pre-existing framework agreements,
    thus avoiding duplication of efforts, or use agreements as starting
    point for their own negotiations **as evidenced by the MERCOSUR Asset Restitution Agreement which provides a regional framework for multiple countries**

**Risks**:

a.  Lengthy negotiations

    i.  Negotiations of a framework agreement may require lengthy
        discussions

    ii. Framework agreements do not necessarily preclude lengthy future
        negotiations

b.  Lack of flexibility

    i.  Framework agreements may not reflect developments in the
        requesting State concerning governance around asset return and
        become outdated quickly

    ii. Changes to a framework agreement may be difficult to negotiate
        and implement

    iii. Framework agreements may focus on the smallest common
         denominator and then apply this standard to other returns, as
         opposed to striving for the maximum

    iv. Framework agreements may not be sufficiently comprehensive or
        appropriate in all cases

    v.  If framework agreements are not customizable, there is
        dependency on the governance structures established in the
        framework agreement

    vi. Framework agreements may not sufficiently take the national
        context of the requesting State party into account

c.  Duplication of efforts

    i.  Should returns be carried out outside of an existing framework
        agreement, efforts would be duplicated

**Conditions for success**:

a.  Adequate capacity to manage the return process

    i.  Sufficient institutional capacity and legislative frameworks in
        place to manage the return process and the returned assets

b.  Sufficient flexibility of framework agreement

    i.  Framework agreements need to be sufficiently flexible to
        accommodate a variety of specific cases **as demonstrated in the Nigeria-UK MoU which allows for case-by-case determinations within an established set of principles**

**c. Option 2c: Using a United Nations/World Bank/Multilateral Development Bank trust fund or project, or setting up a specific vehicle (foundation or trust fund)**

**Description**: Channelling returned assets through 1) a trust fund or dedicated project for development administered by the United Nations, the World Bank or a Multilateral Development Bank, ensuring that such assets are allocated to development projects, or 2) establishing a specific vehicle (foundation or trust fund) for return. **This approach has been successfully implemented in several significant cases including returns to Kazakhstan, Nigeria, and Uzbekistan.**

**Advantages**:

a.  Allows for risk mitigation

    i.  In contexts of fragility or insufficient capacity to manage the returned assets

    ii. If individuals that embezzled funds are still in power, protects against re-corruption **as demonstrated in the Kazakhstan I case where an independent BOTA Foundation was established to prevent re-corruption**

    iii. Protection against insolvency by the implementing party

b.  Capacity to manage returned assets and absorption capacity

    i.  Can absorb multiple asset returns, including from multiple requested States **as seen in the Kazakhstan returns where both Swiss and U.S. governments participated in the asset return process**

    ii. Can absorb large quantities of assets to be returned **such as in the Abacha II return where USD 321 million was channeled to Nigeria's National Social Safety Net Project**

    iii. Longer term investments possible, including in tranches

c.  Existing structures, including for monitoring and evaluation

    i.  Project management structures exist already, including safeguards, monitoring and evaluation, and potentially conflict resolution **as evidenced in the Kazakhstan II return where the World Bank administered USD 48.8 million as a trust fund rather than creating a new entity**

    ii. Overhead costs are spent mostly in the requesting State

    iii. Independent management of returned assets **as seen with the BOTA Foundation in Kazakhstan which ultimately distributed USD 115 million through three separate projects: a conditional cash transfer program, scholarships, and grants for social service provision**

    iv. Existing expertise in development projects, existing capacity for initial implementation **as demonstrated by the World Bank's role in both the Abacha II and Kazakhstan II returns**

    v.  Partner with and use existing structures in the requesting State

    vi. Allows for investment in anti-corruption structures and institutions in the requesting State

d.  Alignment with international standards and goals

    i.  Projects are aligned with international standards and goals such as the Sustainable Development Goals **as demonstrated in the Abacha II return that supported Nigeria's poverty reduction efforts through the National Social Safety Net Project**

    ii. Can ensure victim compensation

e.  Speed of implementation

    i.  Programmes may already exist that can be scaled up quickly

    ii. Multi-partner trust funds can be established quickly as off-the shelf solutions

**Risks**:

a.  Potential delays in implementation, administrative costs and procedures

    i.  Administrative overhead costs can be high **as observed in the Kazakhstan I BOTA Foundation where approximately 10 percent of funds were spent on programme administration**

    ii. Funds administered as regular funding to international partner rather than returned assets belonging to the requesting State

    iii. Administrative procedures may be inflexible and delay implementation **as noted by the Swiss Federal Council when evaluating the BOTA Foundation experience, finding that decision-making processes were slow**

    iv. Funds disbursement may be delayed

    v.  Decision-making processes may be lengthy

    vi. Competition among international partners for funding

    vii. Cost effectiveness considerations may not be positive

    viii. Some multilateral partners may lack the capacity to absorb large amounts of funding

    ix. Risk of duplication of existing structures and efforts **as recognized in the Kazakhstan II return where the Swiss Federal Council noted that by creating a new entity rather than relying on existing agencies, the opportunity to strengthen them was lost**

    x.  Standard operating procedures for communication with victims may be lacking

b.  Perception of external imposition on requesting State

    i.  Negative perception of multilateral partners in some jurisdictions

    ii. Involvement of multilateral partners may be interpreted as external imposition or infringement of sovereignty of States involved

    iii. Priorities for allocation of funding may be perceived as external imposition on requesting State

c.  Quality of project design and implementation

    i.  Projects may be poorly designed or implemented

    ii. Project implementation may suffer from corruption, if multilateral partner is not chosen carefully and does not have sufficient safeguards in place

    iii. Sustainability may not be guaranteed **as highlighted in the Swiss Federal Council's assessment of the BOTA Foundation which closed after the repatriated funds were disbursed, raising concerns about program sustainability**

    iv. Project implementation may suffer from lack of experience, unless qualified personnel is available or hired

d.  Lack of transparency

    i.  Internal procedures are not always easy to understand from the outside

    ii. Involvement of civil society organizations may be insufficient **as noted in the Kazakhstan II return where, unlike Abacha II, civil society did not have a defined role in monitoring or oversight**

    iii. Civil society organizations may lack capacity or accountability

    iv. Reporting on project implementation may be insufficient or not publicly available **as seen in the Kazakhstan II return where the agreement itself was not made public**

    v.  Transparency and accountability mechanisms need to be built into project implementation

**Requirements for success**:

a.  Common vision

    i.  Trust and coordination among all actors required **as demonstrated in the successful implementation of the BOTA Foundation which was monitored by the World Bank, the BOTA board, and the Swiss and US Governments**

    ii. Governance structure/decision-making mechanism required to decide on priorities **as established in the Abacha II agreement which defined clear roles for Nigeria, Switzerland, and the World Bank**

    iii. Flexibility in fund assignment needs to be maintained

    iv. Multilateral partner should be widely accepted in requesting and requested State to avoid perception of interfering in internal affairs

    v.  Sustainability of the project(s) and building local capacity as key consideration **as reflected in the transition from the BOTA Foundation approach in Kazakhstan I to working through existing government agencies in Kazakhstan II**

    vi. Prioritize support for local civil society organizations to build capacity and ensure continuity

b.  Communication and open dialogue

    i.  Clear communication about the use of funds to restore trust of the population **as implemented in the Abacha II return where all reports showing how funds were spent were made publicly available**

    ii. Proactive communication to manage expectations

    iii. Using appropriate communication style and language to ensure that population can access information

    iv. Include civil society organizations to ensure that all population groups can be reached **as structured in the Abacha II monitoring arrangements which included civil society participation from the outset**

c.  Effective monitoring

    i.  Continuous, effective monitoring required to ensure that project priorities reflect the reality and funds are spent appropriately **as demonstrated in the World Bank's role monitoring the Abacha II return**

    ii. Monitoring is proportionate to the amount of funds to be returned

    iii. Inclusion of civil society organizations in monitoring mechanisms, appropriate selection of which organizations should be involved to ensure quality of monitoring and participation of all parts of society **as established in the Abacha II return agreement where civil society was enlisted to help monitor use of funds from the beginning**

**d. Option 2d: Direct return to civil society organization for implementation**

**Description**: Assets are returned directly to civil society organizations rather than government entities for implementation of projects that benefit the population. **This approach has been used in notable cases such as the Jersey-Kenya Windward case where close to USD 4 million was returned to Kenya, and aspects of the US settlement with Equatorial Guinea.**

**Advantages:**

a.  Transparency and asset allocation

    i.  Direct returns to civil society organizations for implementation may lead to greater transparency on the return process and the use of returned assets **as demonstrated in the Jersey-Kenya case where civil society involvement enhanced transparency and public accountability**

    ii. Civil society actors may have direct access to specific communities and be aware of the sustainable development needs that may exist in those communities, thus leading to increased impact of projects using returned assets **as seen in the US-Equatorial Guinea settlement where funds were directed "for the benefit of the people" through organizations with deeper community connections**

b.  Lower administrative costs

    i.  administrative costs of civil society actors tend to be lower **than those of international organizations or government bureaucracies as observed in several asset return cases**

    ii. lower administrative costs allow for a greater portion of returned assets to be used for direct project implementation, thus increasing the impact on sustainable development **as evidenced in civil society-implemented projects that typically maintain lower overhead rates**

**Risks:**

a.  Capacity, selection and representation

    i.  Careful selection of civil society organizations required to ensure capacity and representation **as highlighted by challenges in the US-Equatorial Guinea case where identifying appropriate implementing organizations was a complex process**

    ii. Potential lack of civil society organizations experienced in asset return and in managing returned assets

    iii. Potential lack of capacity for managing larger returns **particularly in countries with less developed civil society sectors or in cases involving substantial sums**

    iv. Potential mistrust between the government and civil society organizations **as can occur in countries with strained government-civil society relations**

    v.  Potential lack of internal oversight, leading to corruption risks

b.  Selection, sustainability and conflict of interest

    i.  Potential conflict of interest if civil society organization advocating for return is subsequently chosen to implement projects using the returned funds

    ii. Potential sustainability risk if one civil society organization receives a large amount of time-bound funding through returned assets **requiring careful planning for program sustainability after funds are depleted**

**Requirements for success:**

a.  Civil society organizations available

    i.  Qualified, interested civil society organizations available (preferably at local level) to implement projects using returned assets **as ensured in the Jersey-Kenya case where organizations with appropriate capacity were identified in advance**

b.  Sufficient civic space available to allow civil society organizations to act **without undue interference from government authorities, as necessary for the effective implementation of programs**

**e. Option 2e: Direct return through development agency**

**Description**: Assets are returned and implemented through the development agency of the requested State rather than directly to the requesting State. **This approach has been used in cases such as asset returns from France to Equatorial Guinea where the French development agency played a key implementation role.**

**Advantages:**

a.  Administrative advantages

    i.  Possibility to make use of existing accountability and reporting structures **of established development agencies which already have robust financial management systems in place**

    ii. Possibility to include in-kind contributions of existing structures **such as technical expertise, monitoring frameworks, and evaluation methodologies**

    iii. Possibility to scale up or replicate existing, successful projects **that development agencies have already piloted or implemented in the country**

b.  Possibility to carry out returns in the absence of local capacity/political will in the receiving State **as demonstrated in cases where concerns about governance or capacity in the requesting State necessitated an alternative implementation channel**

**Risks:**

a.  Unilateral return

    i.  May not match the priorities of the receiving State **if projects are designed primarily by the development agency without sufficient input from national stakeholders**

    ii. May lack legitimacy and credibility **in the eyes of the population of the requesting State who may view it as external control of their assets**

    iii. Decision-making power taken away from receiving State **potentially undermining national ownership and sovereignty**

    iv. Risk of retaliation/interference in programmes **from government authorities if they perceive the approach as bypassing their authority**

b.  Potential perceived conflict of interest, as development agency is from returning State **and may be seen as advancing the foreign policy objectives of the requested State rather than the development needs of the requesting State**

c.  Lack of clear separation between donor funding and returned assets **making it difficult to track the specific impact of the returned assets versus general development assistance**

**Requirements for success:**

a.  Need to have development agency **with sufficient presence and capacity in the requesting State to effectively implement programs**

b.  Clear communication as to why this return vehicle is being chosen **to build understanding and acceptance among the population and authorities of the requesting State**

**Common elements for all options:**

Considerations related to the size of the return will impact the
decision-making as to which option would be considered most appropriate:
Large returns, possibly consisting of several tranches, will require
more capacity to absorb funding and implement projects than smaller
returns. Oversight mechanisms to be established need to be proportionate
to the size of the return, and including spending caps instead of
percentage caps for larger returns can ensure that administrative
expenditure remains appropriate for the return. Pooling returned assets
from several returning jurisdictions can create synergies and reduce
administrative expenditure and time constraints.

Other common elements for consideration include the following:

**1. Oversight mechanisms**

While there is still a lack of experience from other cases that can be
taken into account as lessons learned, oversight mechanisms to monitor
the use of returned assets have been more frequently established in
recent years for asset returns that are not carried out to a single
treasury account but through an agreement or through the setting up of a
dedicated vehicle for the return. By increasing transparency and
accountability, they allow for efficient monitoring of use of returned
assets and in turn increase the efficiency of the use of returned
assets.

Reporting and results stemming from an oversight mechanism enable
receiving States to demonstrate the impact of an asset return, thus
building trust between the requesting and the requested State as well as
informing the population of the receiving State of the benefits obtained
through the use of returned assets.

However, care should be taken to ensure that the establishment of an
oversight mechanism does not significantly decrease the amount of assets
available for return and use due to the costs associated with the
oversight mechanism. In addition, existing governance structures may be
bypassed if a separate oversight mechanism is being established, and
care should be taken not to be over-reliant on the oversight mechanism
and pay less attention to the implementation of the project.

In the project implementation phase, it is also important to manage any
reputational risks associated with delays in the implementation due to
late reporting in cases in which a return is contingent on the reporting
from the oversight mechanism.

To ensure that an oversight mechanism is successful, it needs to be
adequate for and proportionate to the amount of the return and be
supported by all parties involved in the return. A clear agreement on
the objectives of and required reporting stemming from the oversight
mechanism is required, and such a mechanism should be considered already
in the early stages of programming to ensure that it accompanies the
implementation of the project throughout the entire project cycle. The
creation of a risk profile for the return can help inform the decision
on how an oversight mechanism is to be structured and which level of
oversight and reporting would be appropriate. A balance between
standardization and customization of an oversight mechanism is required
to ensure that lessons learned can be implemented while also taking into
account the specificities of each individual return. Furthermore,
consideration should be given to the involvement of civil society
organizations in the oversight mechanism, where appropriate, their role
in the monitoring and the selection of which civil society organizations
to include in such a mechanism.

**2. Domestic coordination**

Domestic coordination among all institutions and partners concerned in
the receiving State allows for access to more expertise and more buy-in
in the requesting State. It can also facilitate speedier implementation
and provide unparalleled access to local civil society organizations.

However, a drawback is that domestic coordination may require longer
time for consensus-building, and a lack of communication can lead to
uncertainty about the role of each institution. Conversely,
over-communicating with too many institutions could also hamper the
progress of the return by causing unnecessary delays and adding layers
of bureaucracy. Finally, political interference in a return could also
prolong the return discussions or diminish the impact of programming
using the returned funds.

To counteract these issues, finding a common agreement on the role of
each institution and the steps to be followed after the return of the
assets can be helpful, as can be having different "main institutions"
involved in different stages of the process. Including all institutions
involved in the return (Law enforcement, Ministry of Finance, judiciary,
agency responsible for implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals and others) in the coordination and return planning from the
outset allows for greater ownership and coordination. In particular,
institutions involved in development tend to be involved only at a late
stage, but return planning would greatly benefit from their earlier
participation. Making use of any existing interagency coordination
mechanisms can facilitate cooperation and strengthen domestic
coordination. Political will demonstrating the importance of the return
for the receiving State can help to foster domestic coordination and
agreement among all institutions involved.

**3. Decision-making on allocation of returned assets -- sustainable
development considerations**

In all returns, decisions on the allocation of returned assets need to
be taken -- different approaches can be followed here, either by
returning assets to the general single treasury account or by allocating
them to specific projects or priorities. Enabling legislation concerning
the allocation of returned assets helps to assign funds to the most
urgent priorities.

Sustainable development considerations factor heavily into the decision
as to where returned funds should be allocated. Such decisions should
align projects funded through returned assets with the development
strategy of the recipient State and ensure a clear link with victim
communities to build trust and restore justice. Evidence-based,
transparent decision-making on allocations that are country- and
context-specific helps ensure that funds are allocated to the greatest
needs and priorities, while also avoiding misunderstandings and the
impression that priorities are imposed by the requested State. By
clearly specifying the projects or programmes that will support
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals and ensuring
multistakeholder engagement, requesting and requested States can provide
clarity on the benefits to be expected from the return and avoid
confusion.

**4. Involving Civil Society**

Involving civil society in the decision-making processes prior to the
allocation of returned assets, as well as in the monitoring of returned
funds, enhances transparency and accountability. To this end,
establishing a legal and institutional framework and ensuring civic
space for their meaningful participation is crucial.

While the options for participation will differ depending on the return
vehicle chosen and on the role of a State as requesting or requested
State, including civil society organizations can build trust among
stakeholders and the public, allow for buy-in at an early stage of an
asset return, and enhance monitoring. Such inclusion can offer fresh
thinking and perspectives and provide additional oversight or
monitoring. In addition, it can create a more direct link with the
population of requesting State, thereby adding knowledge of the specific
context and increasing the impact of a return. Civil society
organizations can also increase the sustainability of a return by
ensuring continuity of programming and reducing overhead costs. The
inclusion of an independent third party also increases transparency and
adds further communication channels, thus reducing the possibilities of
misunderstandings during the asset return process.

To ensure successful involvement, careful consideration of the different
stages of when civil society could be involved is important.
Furthermore, a sound selection process of civil society organizations to
be involved in the return process is crucial to ensure that qualified,
local actors with the right profile participate in the return, as civil
society organizations specialized in asset return may not exist in the
requesting State. Capacity-building and funding for civil society
organizations and clear communications with civil society partners on
expectations, including with regard to reporting obligations, should
form part of the programming from the outset. In addition, having the
support of regional and global civil society organizations and a support
network for civil society organizations can be helpful in contexts in
which it would be difficult to involve or identify independent local
civil society organizations. Ensuring the meaningful participation of
civil society actors from the outset can help add legitimacy and
credibility to the return process and the use of returned funds and
should not be treated as a box-ticking exercise.

However, care needs to be taken to ensure that such a selection process
does not unduly delay the asset return process, and that the process
does not become politicized.

**5. Administration and funding**

Considerations related to administration costs are crucial when deciding
on the appropriate vehicle for asset return. While administrative costs
should be proportionate to the amount of assets returned, it is
important that they are kept to a minimum to ensure that the returned
assets are used for the benefit of the population instead of
administrative costs.

To this end, establishing caps for administrative costs instead of
percentages can be helpful, and structures established in a way that
allows for flexible scaling up or scaling down can facilitate and absorb
any additional asset returns that may be forthcoming.

Preserving the value of assets prior to their return and including any
interest earned on any seized and confiscated assets in the funds
available for project implementation maximize the impact that returned
assets can have for the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals.

In cases involving multilateral actors, shifting the mindset from
treating returned assets as regular funding to treating such assets as
owned by the population of the requesting State party (and therefore not
subject to regular funding rules) can assist with efforts to reduce
administrative costs. However, in view of the reputational risks in case
of mismanagement of returned assets, a reasonable amount of
administrative costs for establishing a monitoring and accountability
mechanism needs to be budgeted. This is also crucial for requested
States, which may incur liabilities related to the asset return in case
of mismanagement of returned assets.

Finally, ensuring that as much of the administrative costs as possible
is spent in the requesting State, thus benefitting the local economy,
can create further synergies.

**6. Communication and transparency**

Throughout an asset return, communication and transparency on the
process, the allocation, the objectives and expected outcomes and
timelines can help manage expectations. In addition, an open,
communicative approach can facilitate ownership of the process by the
population of the requesting State, thus contributing to sustainability
of a return even after projects to which the funds were assigned have
been concluded.

Another aspect facilitated by communication and transparency is
restorative justice, as the population harmed by the underlying offence
will be able to follow the return of the stolen assets and be able to
benefit from them.

**7. Political will**

For any asset return, political will in both the requesting and the
requested State is required. In the absence of political will, options
for return are limited, and the possibilities for allocation of funds
are restricted.

A diplomatic relationship between the requesting and the requested State
also supports successful asset returns, as discussions at the bi- or
multilateral level facilitate finding agreements on return vehicles to
be used and, if desired, the sustainable development priorities to which
the funds are to be allocated.

III. **Conclusion**

The present "Addis guidance on options for returning stolen assets for
sustainable development" outlines options for returning stolen assets,
with a focus on the possibilities of involving multilateral actors in
the return. It is hoped that the outline of the different vehicles
available and the applicable considerations can assist States in their
decisions as to which asset return vehicle would be suitable for a
return they are considering, and how to ensure that the Sustainable
Development Goals are taken into account in this decision.
